README.md, before:

# LineServer #
Author: Dariusz Stefanski

## Description ##
A server that can serve very fast a specidied line from a huge file.

## Example usage ##
1. Configure system.properties if you wish.

2. Build (and install needed software):
$ ./build.sh

3. Run a server:
$ ./run.sh fileName

4. Run a test client:
$ nc localhost 10497

## Implementation details ##
The server processes a specified file during start and creates an index as
binary file with offsets to each line of the original file. The index size is
8 bytes x line count. Then it starts handling clients in parallel using a thread
pool. One thread is used to serve one client. Getting a line is done in 2 steps
and requires 2 disk read for short lines (finding a line in an index and reading
a line from the file). For bigger lines an operating system must make multiple
reads.

## Assumptions ##
* Maximum line length is <= 2GB (Integer.MAX_VALUE)
* There is enough free space on disk for an index file. The index file can be
  even bigger then original file in case of very short lines (like empty one).
* Server start can be slow (the index is built before clients can connect)
 
## Performance ##
Tests where run on 2 machines:
* laptop with Ubuntu 12.04
* laptop with Ubuntu 13.04

File sizes were from few bytes to 100 GB and  random requests were generated
by up to 100 simultaneous running client threads.

### Requests per second ###
Even a huge number of requests per second doesn't break a performance of the system.
A performance degradation is prevented by a limited thread pool.
For details and measurements please look at test-performance.sh and PerformanceLineServerTest.

### Size of file ###
The system is scalable for a growing file size. In theory, it can handle a file
with any size which can be stored in a file system. After reaching "a cache limit",
increasing file size has no influence on speed of GET commands, but only on a system
start (building an index). The time of building index increases linear with a file
size increase. There is one catch. Caches are used for small enough files. There is
almost no disk reads, data is taken from RAM and a number of handled requests per
second is very high (tens of thousands per sec.). Then it starts to lack a space in
the cache and disk reads are done, which drastically decrease performance in terms of
req/s. Then almost each request require 2 disk reads, and each read takes few ms for
magnetic disk drives. Thus the system is capable to serve about 100 req/s when using
only one drive.

## Alternatives ##
Take an existing database, create table Line(nr, text) with index on nr.
Insert all lines to the database and next query by nr.

## Possible extensions ##
* Mount other drive if exists and then we have at least 2 possibilities:
  - put a copy of file and index on the second drive and create 2 TextFile instances
  - put a half of file and index on the first drive and rest on the other one

* Faster file processing and creating index
  The current algorithm is not so bad, because it is not so far from a hardware
  capabilities (measured with hdparm). Albeit parallel processing can potentially
  improve performance. One thread can be used for disk operations and others
  for processing.
  
* Multiple instances of TextFile 

## On-line resources ##
* http://nadeausoftware.com/articles/2008/02/java_tip_how_read_files_quickly

## Libraries and tools ##
* Java 7
* Maven 3
* Junit 4
* Mockito

## TODO ##
* logger: slf4j + log4j
* DI (Juice or Spring)
* consider using netty lib
* lib for shorter equals and hash code
* RAMTextFile for small files
* improve tests
* improve javadocs

Commit message:

Changes mainly in names
- line-server->liner
- GetCommand -> LineCommand
- GetResponse -> LineResponse
- Move protocol description from javadoc do md file

README.md, after:

# Liner #
Author: Dariusz Stefanski

## Description ##
A server that can serve very fast a specified line from a huge file.

## Protocol ##
- LINE n : returns specified line (lines are numbered from 1) from a file in the given format:
    * if n is a valid line number: "OK\n" and then n-th line
    * otherwise: "ERROR\n"
- QUIT: disconnect client
- SHUTDOWN: shutdown the server

## Example usage ##
1. Configure system.properties if you wish.

2. Build (and install needed software):
$ ./build.sh

3. Run a server:
$ ./run.sh fileName

4. Run a test client:
$ nc localhost 10497

## Implementation details ##
The server processes a specified file during start and creates an index as
binary file with offsets to each line of the original file. The index size is
8 bytes x line count. Then it starts handling clients in parallel using a thread
pool. One thread is used to serve one client. Getting a line is done in 2 steps
and requires 2 disk read for short lines (finding a line in an index and reading
a line from the file). For bigger lines an operating system must make multiple
reads.

## Assumptions ##
* Maximum line length is <= 2GB (Integer.MAX_VALUE)
* There is enough free space on disk for an index file. The index file can be
  even bigger then original file in case of very short lines (like empty one).
* Server start can be slow (the index is built before clients can connect)
 
## Performance ##
Tests where run on 2 machines:
* laptop with Ubuntu 12.04
* laptop with Ubuntu 13.04

File sizes were from few bytes to 100 GB and  random requests were generated
by up to 100 simultaneous running client threads.

### Requests per second ###
Even a huge number of requests per second doesn't break a performance of the system.
A performance degradation is prevented by a limited thread pool.
For details and measurements please look at test-performance.sh and PerformanceLinerTest.

### Size of file ###
The system is scalable for a growing file size. In theory, it can handle a file
with any size which can be stored in a file system. After reaching "a cache limit",
increasing file size has no influence on speed of GET commands, but only on a system
start (building an index). The time of building index increases linear with a file
size increase. There is one catch. Caches are used for small enough files. There is
almost no disk reads, data is taken from RAM and a number of handled requests per
second is very high (tens of thousands per sec.). Then it starts to lack a space in
the cache and disk reads are done, which drastically decrease performance in terms of
req/s. Then almost each request require 2 disk reads, and each read takes few ms for
magnetic disk drives. Thus the system is capable to serve about 100 req/s when using
only one drive.

## Alternatives ##
Take an existing database, create table Line(nr, text) with index on nr.
Insert all lines to the database and next query by nr.

## Possible extensions ##
* Mount other drive if exists and then we have at least 2 possibilities:
  - put a copy of file and index on the second drive and create 2 TextFile instances
  - put a half of file and index on the first drive and rest on the other one

* Faster file processing and creating index
  The current algorithm is not so bad, because it is not so far from a hardware
  capabilities (measured with hdparm). Albeit parallel processing can potentially
  improve performance. One thread can be used for disk operations and others
  for processing.
  
* Multiple instances of TextFile 

## On-line resources ##
* http://nadeausoftware.com/articles/2008/02/java_tip_how_read_files_quickly

## Libraries and tools ##
* Java 7
* Maven 3
* Junit 4
* Mockito

## TODO ##
* logger: slf4j + log4j
* DI (Juice or Spring)
* consider using netty lib
* lib for shorter equals and hash code
* RAMTextFile for small files
* improve tests
* improve javadocs
